src/pages/traits/traits.md, before:

---
layout: page
title: "This or That: Traits"
---

**Traits** are templates for creating classes, in the same way that classes are templates for creating objects. Traits allow us to express that two or more classes can be considered the same, and thus both implement the same operations. In other words, traits allow us to express that multiple classes share a common super-type (outside of the `Any` super-type that all classes share).

<div class="java-tip">
Traits are very much like Java 8's *interfaces* with *default methods*. If you have not used Java 8, you can think of traits as being like a cross between interfaces and *abstract classes*.
</div>


Plan
- Example of trait
- Trait syntax
- Differences from a class
- Meaning of a trait (OR)

## An Example of Traits

Let's start with an example of a trait. Imagine we're modelling visitors to a website. There are two types of visitor: those who have registered on our site and those who are anonymous. We can model these with two classes:

~~~ scala
import java.util.Date

case class Anonymous(id: String, createdAt: Date = new Date())

case class User(
  id: String,
  email: String,
  createdAt: Date = new Date()
)
~~~

With these class definitions we're saying that both anonymous and registered visitors have an id and a creation date, but we only know the email address of registered visitors.

There is obvious duplication here, and it would be nice to not have to write the same definitions twice. More important though, is to create some common type for the two kinds of visitors. If they had some type in common (other than `AnyRef` and `Any`) we could write methods that worked on any kind of visitor. We can do this with a trait like so:

~~~ scala
import java.util.Date

trait Visitor {
  def id: String      // Unique id assigned to each user
  def createdAt: Date // Date this user first visited the site

  // How long has this visitor been around?
  def age: Long = new Date().getTime - createdAt.getTime
}

case class Anonymous(val id: String, createdAt: Date = new Date()) extends Visitor

case class User(
  id: String,
  email: String,
  createdAt: Date = new Date()
) extends Visitor
~~~

Note the two changes:

- we defined the trait `Visitor`; and
- we declared that `Anonymous` and `User` are subtypes of the `Visitor` trait by using the `extends` keyword.

The `Visitor` trait expresses an interface that any sub-types must implement: they must implement a `String` called `id` and a `createdAt` `Date`. Any sub-type of `Visitor` also automatically has a method `age` as defined in `Visitor`.

By defining the `Visitor` trait we can write methods that work with any sub-type of visitor, like so:

~~~ scala
scala> def older(v1: Visitor, v2: Visitor): Boolean =
         v1.createdAt.before(v2.createdAt)

scala> older(Anonymous("1"), User("2", "test@example.com"))
older(Anonymous("1"), User("2", "test@example.com"))
res4: Boolean = true
~~~

Here the method `older` can be called with either an `Anonymous` or a `User` as they are both subtypes of `Visitor`. This illustrates the most important role of using traits, and the one on which we're focusing: defining a logical relationship between traits and classes. Given the definitions above we can say that a `Visitor` *is-a* `User` or an `Anonymous`.

## Trait Syntax

We've seen an example of declaring and using a trait above. Let's quickly summarise the syntax before we move on.

To declare a trait we write

~~~ scala
trait Name {
  declarationOrExpression ...
}
~~~

Note how this syntax closely mirrors that for declaring a class.

To declare that a class is a subtype of a trait we write

~~~ scala
class Name(...) extends TraitName {
  ...
}
~~~

More commonly we'll use case classes, but the syntax is the same

~~~ scala
case class Name(...) extends TraitName {
 ...
}
~~~

## Traits versus Classes

Like a class, a trait is a named set of field and method definitions. However, it differs from a class in a few important ways:

 - **A trait cannot have a constructor** -- we can't create objects directly from a trait. Instead we use one or more traits to create a class, and then create objects from that class. We can base as many classes as we like on a trait.

 - Traits can define **abstract fields and methods** that have names and type signatures but no implementations. We saw this in the `Visitor` trait. We must specify the implementation by the time we create a class from the trait, but until that point we're free to leave definitions abstract.

Let's return to the `Visitor` trait to further explore abstract definitions. Recall the definition of `Visitor` is

~~~ scala
import java.util.Date

trait Visitor {
  def id: String      // Unique id assigned to each user
  def createdAt: Date // Date this user first visited the site

  // How long has this visitor been around?
  def age: Long = new Date().getTime - createdAt.getTime
}
~~~

`Visitor` prescribes two abstract methods. That is, methods which do not have an implementation. These are `id` and `createdAt`. It also defines a concrete method, `age`, that is defined in terms of one of the abstract methods.

`Visitor` is used as a building block for two classes: `Anonymous` and `User`. Each class `extends Visitor`, meaning it inherits all of its fields and methods:

~~~ scala
scala> Anonymous("anon1")
res14: Anonymous = Anonymous(anon1)

scala> res14.createdAt
res15: java.util.Date = Mon Mar 24 15:11:45 GMT 2014

scala> res14.age
res16: Long = 8871
~~~

`id` and `createdAt` are abstract so they must be defined in extending classes to satisfy the compiler. Our classes implement them as `vals` rather than `defs`. This is legal in Scala, which sees `def` as a more general version of `val`[^uap]. It is good practice to never define `val`s in a trait, but rather to use `def`. A concrete implementation can then implement it using using a `def` or `val` as appropriate.

The `extends` keyword can be used to extend classes as well as traits. When we do this we need to specify the parameters of the super-constructor in the definition:

~~~ scala
class Administrator(
  id: String,
  createdAt: Date = new Date(),
  email: String
) extends User(id, createdAt, email)
~~~

<div class="alert alert-warning">
**Warning:** It is inadvisable to extend a case class to create another case class. The implementation of case classes relies on details like the number of fields -- modifying the structure in a subclass can lead to bugs in certain features like pattern matching.

It is best practice to only create case classes as leaves of a type hierarchy. If we do have to extend a `case class`, we should always make the subtype a regular `class` and define the extra methods ourselves.
</div>

[^uap]: This is all part of the [uniform access principle] we saw in the exercises for [Object Literals](object-literals.html).

[uniform access principle]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uniform_access_principle

## Subtyping and Polymorphism

A trait is a type just like a class. A class that extends a trait is a *subtype* of that trait, and any object of that class is both a value of the subtype and a value of the supertype. This is a kind of [polymorphism](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polymorphism_(computer_science)) -- essentially the polymorphism we get from Java.

Anywhere in our code that we expect an instance of the supertype, we can use an instance of the subtype instead. For example, we can assign `User` to a variable of type `Visitor` or pass it to a method that expects a `Visitor` as a parameter:

~~~ scala
scala> val visitor: Visitor = User("a", "me@example.com")
visitor: Visitor = User(a,me@example.com,Fri Feb 14 12:05:25 GMT 2014)

scala> def ageString(v: Visitor) =
     |   v.id + " is " + v.age + "ms old"
ageString: (v: Visitor)String

scala> ageString(User("a", "me@example.com"))
res14: String = a is 0ms old
~~~

## Exploiting Types

In one sense a type is just a collection of values that share common properties. More than that, though, a type can represent **any property of a program that we can establish without evaluating it.**

In old languages like C, types were used to specify the machine representation of data, essentially providing optimisation hints to the compiler. In modern languages like Scala, **types are used to ensure that important program properties are maintained**.

A good Scala developer uses types to his or her advantage to avoid bugs and write self-documenting code.

## Take Home Points

Traits are a way of **abstracting over classes** that have similar properties, just like classes are a way of abstracting over objects.

Many relationships between types in programming can be modelled using the phrase **this or that**. These are known in functional programming as **sum types**. Traits are a great tool (although not the only tool) for modelling these relationships.

We can also model sum types using *generics* -- we'll see these later.

## Exercises

### Shaping up with traits

Define a trait called `Shape` and give it three abstract methods:

 - `sides` returns the number of sides;
 - `perimeter` returns the total length of the sides;
 - `area` returns the area.

Implement `Shape` with three classes: `Circle`, `Rectangle`, and `Square`. In each case provide implementations of each of the three methods. Ensure that the main constructor parameters of each shape (e.g. the radius of the circle) are accessible as fields.

**Tip:** The value of &pi; is accessible as `math.Pi`.

<div class="solution">
~~~ scala
trait Shape {
  def sides: Int
  def perimeter: Double
  def area: Double
}

case class Circle(radius: Double) extends Shape {
  val sides = 1
  val perimeter = 2 * math.Pi * radius
  val area = math.Pi * radius * radius
}

case class Rectangle(width: Double, height: Double) extends Shape {
  val sides = 4
  val perimeter = 2 * width + 2 * height
  val area = width * height
}

case class Square(size: Double) extends Shape {
  val sides = 4
  val perimeter = 4 * size
  val area = size * size
}
~~~
</div>

### Shaping up 2 (da streets)

The solution from the last exercise delivered three distinct types of shape. However, it doesn't model the relationships between the three correctly. A `Square` isn't just a `Shape` -- it's also a type of `Rectangle` where the width and height are the same.

We want to avoid case-class-to-case-class inheritance, so refactor the solution to the last exercise so that `Square` and `Rectangle` are subtypes of a common type `Rectangular`.

<div class="solution">
The new code looks like this:

~~~ scala
// trait Shape ...

// case class Circle ...

trait Rectangular extends Shape {
  def width: Int
  def height: Int
  val sides = 4
  val perimeter = 2*width + 2*height
  val area = width*height
}

case class Square(val size: Int) extends Rectangular {
  val width = size
  val height = size
}

case class Rectangle(val width: Int, val height: Int) extends Rectangular
~~~
</div>

Commit message:

Trait patterns
Start formalising the patterns idea. Add CSS for said pattern.

src/pages/traits/traits.md, after:

---
layout: page
title: "This or That: Traits"
---

**Traits** are templates for creating classes, in the same way that classes are templates for creating objects. Traits allow us to express that two or more classes can be considered the same, and thus both implement the same operations. In other words, traits allow us to express that multiple classes share a common super-type (outside of the `Any` super-type that all classes share).

<div class="java-tip">
Traits are very much like Java 8's *interfaces* with *default methods*. If you have not used Java 8, you can think of traits as being like a cross between interfaces and *abstract classes*.
</div>


Plan
- Example of trait
- Trait syntax
- Differences from a class
- Meaning of a trait (OR)

## An Example of Traits

Let's start with an example of a trait. Imagine we're modelling visitors to a website. There are two types of visitor: those who have registered on our site and those who are anonymous. We can model these with two classes:

~~~ scala
import java.util.Date

case class Anonymous(id: String, createdAt: Date = new Date())

case class User(
  id: String,
  email: String,
  createdAt: Date = new Date()
)
~~~

With these class definitions we're saying that both anonymous and registered visitors have an id and a creation date, but we only know the email address of registered visitors.

There is obvious duplication here, and it would be nice to not have to write the same definitions twice. More important though, is to create some common type for the two kinds of visitors. If they had some type in common (other than `AnyRef` and `Any`) we could write methods that worked on any kind of visitor. We can do this with a trait like so:

~~~ scala
import java.util.Date

trait Visitor {
  def id: String      // Unique id assigned to each user
  def createdAt: Date // Date this user first visited the site

  // How long has this visitor been around?
  def age: Long = new Date().getTime - createdAt.getTime
}

case class Anonymous(val id: String, createdAt: Date = new Date()) extends Visitor

case class User(
  id: String,
  email: String,
  createdAt: Date = new Date()
) extends Visitor
~~~

Note the two changes:

- we defined the trait `Visitor`; and
- we declared that `Anonymous` and `User` are subtypes of the `Visitor` trait by using the `extends` keyword.

The `Visitor` trait expresses an interface that any sub-type must implement: they must implement a `String` called `id` and a `createdAt` `Date`. Any sub-type of `Visitor` also automatically has a method `age` as defined in `Visitor`.

By defining the `Visitor` trait we can write methods that work with any sub-type of visitor, like so:

~~~ scala
scala> def older(v1: Visitor, v2: Visitor): Boolean =
         v1.createdAt.before(v2.createdAt)

scala> older(Anonymous("1"), User("2", "test@example.com"))
older(Anonymous("1"), User("2", "test@example.com"))
res4: Boolean = true
~~~

Here the method `older` can be called with either an `Anonymous` or a `User` as they are both subtypes of `Visitor`. This illustrates the most important role of using traits, and the one on which we're focusing: defining a logical relationship between traits and classes. Given the definitions above we can say that a `Visitor` *is-a* `User` *or* an `Anonymous`.

## Trait Syntax

We've seen an example of declaring and using a trait above. Let's quickly summarise the syntax before we move on.

To declare a trait we write

~~~ scala
trait TraitName {
  declarationOrExpression ...
}
~~~

Note how this syntax closely mirrors that for declaring a class.

To declare that a class is a subtype of a trait we write

~~~ scala
class Name(...) extends TraitName {
  ...
}
~~~

More commonly we'll use case classes, but the syntax is the same

~~~ scala
case class Name(...) extends TraitName {
 ...
}
~~~

## Modelling Data With Traits

The most important use of traits, and the one we're focusing on in this course, is to model a **logical or** relationship.

In the example above we modelled a website visitor which is either a registered user or anonymous. There are many other cases. Attempting to login to a website can succeed or failure. A smartphone can run iOS, Android, Windows Mobile, Firefox OS, or a few other operating systems. These are all cases of logical ors.

In some examples we can enumerate all the cases (logins either succeed or fail; there are no other choices), whilst in other cases we cannot (such as the smartphone example; new mobile operating systems will continue to be developed). The trait pattern allows us to model either case but we will shortly see an refinement specifically for the case when we can completely enumerate all the variants. For now this is our pattern:

<div class="pattern">
### The Logical Or Pattern

If *A* is a *B* or a *C*, we write
<p></p>

~~~ scala
trait A

case class B() extends A
case class C() extends A
~~~
</div>

## Traits Compared to Classes

Like a class, a trait is a named set of field and method definitions. However, it differs from a class in a few important ways:

 - **A trait cannot have a constructor** -- we can't create objects directly from a trait. Instead we can use a trait to create a class, and then create objects from that class. We can base as many classes as we like on a trait.

 - Traits can define **abstract methods** that have names and type signatures but no implementation. We saw this in the `Visitor` trait. We must specify the implementation when we create a class that extends the trait, but until that point we're free to leave definitions abstract.

Let's return to the `Visitor` trait to further explore abstract definitions. Recall the definition of `Visitor` is

~~~ scala
import java.util.Date

trait Visitor {
  def id: String      // Unique id assigned to each user
  def createdAt: Date // Date this user first visited the site

  // How long has this visitor been around?
  def age: Long = new Date().getTime - createdAt.getTime
}
~~~

`Visitor` prescribes two abstract methods. That is, methods which do not have an implementation but must be implemented by extending classes. These are `id` and `createdAt`. It also defines a concrete method, `age`, that is defined in terms of one of the abstract methods.

`Visitor` is used as a building block for two classes: `Anonymous` and `User`. Each class `extends Visitor`, meaning it inherits all of its fields and methods:

~~~ scala
scala> Anonymous("anon1")
res14: Anonymous = Anonymous(anon1)

scala> res14.createdAt
res15: java.util.Date = Mon Mar 24 15:11:45 GMT 2014

scala> res14.age
res16: Long = 8871
~~~

`id` and `createdAt` are abstract so they must be defined in extending classes. Our classes implement them as `vals` rather than `defs`. This is legal in Scala, which sees `def` as a more general version of `val`[^uap]. It is good practice to never define `val`s in a trait, but rather to use `def`. A concrete implementation can then implement it using using a `def` or `val` as appropriate.

The `extends` keyword can be used to extend classes as well as traits. When we do this we need to specify the parameters of the super-constructor in the definition:

~~~ scala
class Administrator(
  id: String,
  createdAt: Date = new Date(),
  email: String
) extends User(id, createdAt, email)
~~~

<div class="alert alert-warning">
**Warning:** It is inadvisable to extend a case class to create another case class. The implementation of case classes relies on details like the number of fields -- modifying the structure in a subclass can lead to bugs in certain features like pattern matching.

It is best practice to only create case classes as leaves of a type hierarchy. If we do have to extend a `case class`, we should always make the subtype a regular `class` and define the extra methods ourselves.
</div>

[^uap]: This is all part of the [uniform access principle] we saw in the exercises for [Object Literals](object-literals.html).

[uniform access principle]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uniform_access_principle

## Subtyping and Polymorphism

A trait is a type just like a class. A class that extends a trait is a *subtype* of that trait, and any object of that class is both a value of the subtype and a value of the supertype. This is a kind of [polymorphism](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polymorphism_(computer_science)) -- essentially the polymorphism we get from Java.

Anywhere in our code that we expect an instance of the supertype, we can use an instance of the subtype instead. For example, we can assign `User` to a variable of type `Visitor` or pass it to a method that expects a `Visitor` as a parameter:

~~~ scala
scala> val visitor: Visitor = User("a", "me@example.com")
visitor: Visitor = User(a,me@example.com,Fri Feb 14 12:05:25 GMT 2014)

scala> def ageString(v: Visitor) =
     |   v.id + " is " + v.age + "ms old"
ageString: (v: Visitor)String

scala> ageString(User("a", "me@example.com"))
res14: String = a is 0ms old
~~~

## Exploiting Types

In one sense a type is just a collection of values that share common properties. More than that, though, a type can represent **any property of a program that we can establish without evaluating it.**

In old languages like C, types were used to specify the machine representation of data, essentially providing optimisation hints to the compiler. In modern languages like Scala, **types are used to ensure that important program properties are maintained**.

A good Scala developer uses types to his or her advantage to avoid bugs and write self-documenting code.

## Take Home Points

Traits are a way of **abstracting over classes** that have similar properties, just like classes are a way of abstracting over objects.

Many relationships between types in programming can be modelled using the phrase **this or that**. These are known in functional programming as **sum types**. Traits are a great tool (although not the only tool) for modelling these relationships.

We can also model sum types using *generics* -- we'll see these later.

## Exercises

### Shaping up with traits

Define a trait called `Shape` and give it three abstract methods:

 - `sides` returns the number of sides;
 - `perimeter` returns the total length of the sides;
 - `area` returns the area.

Implement `Shape` with three classes: `Circle`, `Rectangle`, and `Square`. In each case provide implementations of each of the three methods. Ensure that the main constructor parameters of each shape (e.g. the radius of the circle) are accessible as fields.

**Tip:** The value of &pi; is accessible as `math.Pi`.

<div class="solution">
~~~ scala
trait Shape {
  def sides: Int
  def perimeter: Double
  def area: Double
}

case class Circle(radius: Double) extends Shape {
  val sides = 1
  val perimeter = 2 * math.Pi * radius
  val area = math.Pi * radius * radius
}

case class Rectangle(width: Double, height: Double) extends Shape {
  val sides = 4
  val perimeter = 2 * width + 2 * height
  val area = width * height
}

case class Square(size: Double) extends Shape {
  val sides = 4
  val perimeter = 4 * size
  val area = size * size
}
~~~
</div>

### Shaping up 2 (da streets)

The solution from the last exercise delivered three distinct types of shape. However, it doesn't model the relationships between the three correctly. A `Square` isn't just a `Shape` -- it's also a type of `Rectangle` where the width and height are the same.

We want to avoid case-class-to-case-class inheritance, so refactor the solution to the last exercise so that `Square` and `Rectangle` are subtypes of a common type `Rectangular`.

<div class="solution">
The new code looks like this:

~~~ scala
// trait Shape ...

// case class Circle ...

trait Rectangular extends Shape {
  def width: Int
  def height: Int
  val sides = 4
  val perimeter = 2*width + 2*height
  val area = width*height
}

case class Square(val size: Int) extends Rectangular {
  val width = size
  val height = size
}

case class Rectangle(val width: Int, val height: Int) extends Rectangular
~~~
</div>
