src/pages/collections/index.md, before:

---
layout: page
title: Collections
---

We hardly need to state how important good collection classes are. The Collections API was one of the most significant additions to Java, and Scala's collections framework, completely revised and updated in 2.8, is an equally important addition to Scala.

In this section we're going to look at the key datastructures in Scala's collection library, how we use them, and how they interoperate with Java and Java collections.

We will start with sequences, and explore many of the features of the collections library via them. We begin with basic operations on sequences, and then briefly examine the distinction Scala makes between interface and implementation, and mutable and immutable sequences. We then explore in depth the methods Scala provides to transform sequences. Finally we will look at the concrete implementations available, their performance characteristics, and how they are distinguished in the type system.

Next we will cover the other main classes of collections: maps and sets. We will discover that they share a great deal in common with sequences, so most of our knowledge transfers directly.

After covering the main collection types we turn to for comprehensions, a syntax that allows convenient specification of operations on collections.

We then turn to some of the less used parts of the collections library: arrays, streams, and iterators, and finish with a look at Java interoperation.

Commit message:

Extract monads to its own section

src/pages/collections/index.md, after:

---
layout: page
title: Collections
---

We hardly need to state how important good collection classes are. The Collections API was one of the most significant additions to Java, and Scala's collections framework, completely revised and updated in 2.8, is an equally important addition to Scala.

In this section we're going to look at the key datastructures in Scala's collection library: sequences and maps.

We will start with sequences, and explore many of the features of the collections library via them. We begin with basic operations on sequences, and then briefly examine the distinction Scala makes between interface and implementation, and mutable and immutable sequences. We then explore in depth the methods Scala provides to transform sequences.

After covering the main collection types we turn to for comprehensions, a syntax that allows convenient specification of operations on collections. We'll also briefly look at a generalisation of collections, called monads, that work well with for comprehensions.

Next we will cover the other main collection classes: maps and sets. We will discover that they share a great deal in common with sequences, so most of our knowledge transfers directly.

We finish with discussion of ranges, which represent sequences of integers.
