src/pages/intro/literals.md, before:

---
layout: page
title: Literal Objects
---

The simplest expressions are literals. A literal expression represents a fixed value that stands "for itself". Here's an example:

~~~scala
scala> 42
res0: Int = 42
~~~

This interaction at the REPL shows us that the literal `42` evaluates to the `Int` `42`. Don't confuse a literal with the value it evaluates to! The literal expression is the representation in the program text before the program is run. The value is the representation in the computer's memory after the program has run.

If you have prior programming experience you won't be surprised at the available literals in Java. Here's a quick run down of the major ones.

### Numbers

Numbers share the same types available in Java: `Int` for 32-bit integers, `Double` for 64-bit floating point, `Float` for 32-bit floating point, and `Long` for 64-bit integers.

~~~scala
scala> 42
res0: Int = 42

scala> 42.0
res1: Double = 42.0

scala> 42.0f
res2: Float = 42.0

scala> 42.0l
res3: Long = 42
~~~

Scala also has 16-bit `Short` integers and 8-bit `Byte`s, but there is no literal syntax for creating them. We'll see how to create them in a bit.

### Booleans

Booleans are exactly the same as Java: `true` or `false`.

~~~scala
scala> true
res11: Boolean = true

scala> false
res12: Boolean = false
~~~

### Characters

`Chars` are 16-bit Unicode values written as a single character enclosed in single quotes.

~~~scala
scala> 'a'
res34: Char = a
~~~

<div class="alert alert-info">
  **Java tip:** Although they are written with initial capitals, Scala's `Int`, `Double`, `Float`, `Long`, `Short`, `Byte`, `Boolen` and `Char` refer to exactly the same things as `int`, `double`, `float`, `long`, `short`, `byte`, `boolean`, and `char` in Java.

  In Scala all of these types act like objects with methods and fields. However, once your code is compiled, a Scala `Int` is exactly the same as a Java `int`. This makes interoperability between the two languages a breeze.
</div>

### Strings

Strings are exactly Java's strings, and written the same way.

~~~scala
scala> "this is a string"
res8: java.lang.String = this is a string

scala> "the\nusual\tescape characters apply"
res9: java.lang.String =
the
usual escape characters apply
~~~

### Null

Null is the same as Java, though not used nearly as often.

~~~scala
scala> null
res13: Null = null
~~~

<div class="alert alert-info">
  **Java tip:** Although `nulls` are common in Java code, they are considered very bad practice in Scala. The main use of `null` is to implement *optional* values that have some value or no value at different points of a program's execution. However, `null` values cannot be checked by the compiler, which can lead to runtime errors in the form of `NullPointerExceptions`.

  In Scala we have ways of defining optional values that can be checked by the compiler, removing the necessity of using `null` in our code. We will learn about these later.
</div>

### Unit

Unit, written `()`, is the Scala equivalent of Java's `void`. Unit is the result of expressions that evaluate to no interesting value, such as printing to standard output using `println`. The REPL doesn't print unit but we can ask for the type of an expression to see that unit is in fact the result of some expressions.

~~~scala
scala> ()

scala> :type ()
Unit

scala> println("something")
something

scala> :type println("something")
Unit
~~~

Unit is an important concept in Scala. Most of a Scala program consists of expressions, and expressions must evaluate to values. We need a value for expressions that have no useful value, and unit is that value.

### Exercises

#### Literally Just Literals

What are the values and types of the following Scala literals?

~~~scala
42

true

123L

42.0
~~~

<div class="solution">
`42` is an `Int`. `true` is a `Boolean`. `123L` is a `Long`. `42.0` is a `Double`.

This exercise just gives you some experience using the Scala REPL or Worksheet.
</div>

#### Quotes and Misquotes

What is the difference between the following literals? What is the type and value of each?

~~~ scala
'a'

"a"
~~~

#### An Aside on Side-Effects

What is the difference between the following expressions? What is the type and value of each?

~~~scala
"Hello world!"

println("Hello world!")
~~~

#### Learning By Mistakes

What is the type and value of the following literal? Try writing it in a Scala worksheet and see what happens!

~~~scala
'Hello world!'
~~~

Commit message:

Improvements for Mind Candy training: refactor "Everything is an Object", add print stylings, add "Getting Started" section, tweak some style rules.

src/pages/intro/literals.md, after:

---
layout: page
title: Literal Objects
---

The simplest expressions are literals. A literal expression represents a fixed value that stands "for itself". Here's an example:

~~~scala
scala> 42
res0: Int = 42
~~~

This interaction at the REPL shows us that the literal `42` evaluates to the `Int` `42`. Don't confuse a literal with the value it evaluates to! The literal expression is the representation in the program text before the program is run. The value is the representation in the computer's memory after the program has run.

If you have prior programming experience, particularly Java experience, you won't be surprised at the available literals in Scala. Here's a quick run down of the major ones.

### Numbers

Numbers share the same types available in Java: `Int` for 32-bit integers, `Double` for 64-bit floating point, `Float` for 32-bit floating point, and `Long` for 64-bit integers.

~~~scala
scala> 42
res0: Int = 42

scala> 42.0
res1: Double = 42.0

scala> 42.0f
res2: Float = 42.0

scala> 42l
res3: Long = 42
~~~

Scala also has 16-bit `Short` integers and 8-bit `Byte`s, but there is no literal syntax for creating them. Instead, we create them using *methods* called `toShort` and `toByte`. We'll learn more about this in the next section.

### Booleans

Booleans are exactly the same as Java: `true` or `false`.

~~~scala
scala> true
res11: Boolean = true

scala> false
res12: Boolean = false
~~~

### Characters

`Chars` are 16-bit Unicode values written as a single character enclosed in single quotes.

~~~scala
scala> 'a'
res34: Char = a
~~~

<div class="alert alert-info">
  **Java tip:** Although they are written with initial capitals, Scala's `Int`, `Double`, `Float`, `Long`, `Short`, `Byte`, `Boolen` and `Char` refer to exactly the same things as `int`, `double`, `float`, `long`, `short`, `byte`, `boolean`, and `char` in Java.

  In Scala all of these types act like objects with methods and fields. However, once your code is compiled, a Scala `Int` is exactly the same as a Java `int`. This makes interoperability between the two languages a breeze.
</div>

### Strings

Strings are exactly Java's strings, and are written the same way.

~~~scala
scala> "this is a string"
res8: java.lang.String = this is a string

scala> "the\nusual\tescape characters apply"
res9: java.lang.String =
the
    usual escape characters apply
~~~

### Null

Null is the same as Java, though not used nearly as often.

~~~scala
scala> null
res13: Null = null
~~~

<div class="alert alert-info">
  **Java tip:** Although `nulls` are common in Java code, they are considered very bad practice in Scala.

  The main use of `null` in Java is to implement *optional* values that have some or no value at different points of a program's execution. However, `null` values cannot be checked by the compiler, which can lead to runtime errors in the form of `NullPointerExceptions`.

  In Scala we have ways of defining optional values that are checked by the compiler. This removes the necessity of using `null`, making our programs much safer. We will learn about these later.
</div>

### Unit

Unit, written `()`, is the Scala equivalent of Java's `void`. Unit is the result of expressions that evaluate to no interesting value, such as printing to standard output using `println`. The REPL doesn't print unit but we can ask for the type of an expression to see that unit is in fact the result of some expressions.

~~~scala
scala> ()

scala> :type ()
Unit

scala> println("something")
something

scala> :type println("something")
Unit
~~~

Unit is an important concept in Scala. Many of Scala's syntactic constructs are *expressions* that have types and values. We need a placeholder for expressions that don't yield a useful value, and unit provides just that.

### Take home points

We have been introduced to the basic data types in Scala, which are identical to the basic types available in Java.

We have seen how to write *literal* values of each type. The syntax is, again, very similar to Java.

Finally, we have noted that every literal has a **value** and a **type** - something which is also true for more complex Scala expressions.

In the next section we will start combining values into expressions and producing code that has useful effects.

### Exercises

#### Literally Just Literals

What are the values and types of the following Scala literals?

~~~scala
42

true

123L

42.0
~~~

<div class="solution">
`42` is an `Int`. `true` is a `Boolean`. `123L` is a `Long`. `42.0` is a `Double`.

This exercise just gives you some experience using the Scala REPL or Worksheet.
</div>

#### Quotes and Misquotes

What is the difference between the following literals? What is the type and value of each?

~~~ scala
'a'

"a"
~~~

#### An Aside on Side-Effects

What is the difference between the following expressions? What is the type and value of each?

~~~scala
"Hello world!"

println("Hello world!")
~~~

#### Learning By Mistakes

What is the type and value of the following literal? Try writing it in a Scala worksheet and see what happens!

~~~scala
'Hello world!'
~~~
