src/pages/objects/generics.md, before:

---
layout: page
title: "This contains That: Generics"
---

In the previous sections we saw how to model relationships such as **this and that** and **this or that** using *inheritance* -- a classic object oriented design pattern. In this section we will look at how to model these relationships in another way using **aggregation** -- grouping objects together using other objects.

We already know how to do simple aggregation in simple cases using fields. Here we start generalising over the types in our fields using **generic types**.

## Generic Types

Generic types naturally arise in collections, so let's consider a really simple collection -- a box that stores a single value. We don't care what type is stored in the box, but we want to make sure we preserve that type when we get the value out of the box. To do this we use a generic type.

~~~ scala
scala> case class Box[A](val value: A)
defined class Box

scala> Box(2)
res0: Box[Int] = Box(2)

scala> res0.value
res1: Int = 2

scala> Box("hi") // if we omit the type parameter, scala will infer its value
res2: Box[String] = Box(hi)

scala> res2.value
res3: String = hi
~~~

The syntax `[A]` is called a **type parameter** -- it binds a name to a type. Wherever `A` occurs in our class definition we will substitute in the same type. This works in the same way that binding a name to a value (using `val`) allows us to substitute in the value wherever the name occurs. The only difference is that we're operating on types rather than values.

We can also add type parameters to methods, which limits the scope of the parameter to the method declaration and body:

~~~ scala
scala> def generic[A](in: A): A = in
generic: [A](in: A)A

scala> generic[String]("foo")
res10: String = foo

scala> generic(1) // again, if we omit the type parameter, scala will infer it
res11: Int = 1
~~~

## This and That

Let's look at using generics to model a *this and that* relationship. Consider a method that returns two values -- for example, an `Int` and a `String`, or a `Boolean` and a `Double`:

~~~ scala
def intAndString: ??? = // ...

def booleanAndDouble: ??? = // ...
~~~

The question is what do we use as the return types? We could use a regular class without any type parameters, but then we would have to implement one version of the class for each combination of return types:

~~~ scala
case class IntAndString(intValue: Int, stringValue: String)

def intAndString: IntAndString = // ...

case class BooleanAndDouble(booleanValue: Boolean, doubleValue: Double)

def booleanAndDoule: BoleanAndDouble = // ...
~~~

The answer is to use generics to create something called a **product type** -- for example a `Pair` -- that contains the relevant data for *both* return types:

~~~ scala
def intAndString: Pair[Int, String] = // ...

def booleanAndDouble: Pair[Boolean, Double] = // ...
~~~

### Exercise: Pairs

Implement the `Pair` class from above. It should store two values -- `one` and `two` -- and be generic in both arguments. Example usage:

~~~ scala
scala> val pair = Pair[String, Int]("hi", 2)
pair: Pair[String,Int] = Pair(hi,2)

scala> pair.one
res13: String = hi

scala> pair.two
res14: Int = 2
~~~

<div class="solution">
If one type parameter is good, two type parameters are better:

~~~ scala
case class Pair[A, B](val one: A, val two: B)
~~~

Note that we don't always need to specify the type parameters when we construct `Pairs`. The compiler will attempt to infer the types as usual wherever it can:

~~~ scala
scala> val pair = Pair("hi", 2)
pair: Pair[String,Int] = Pair(hi,2)
~~~
</div>

### Tuples

A *tuple* is the generalisation of a pair to any number of terms. Scala includes built-in generic tuple types with up to 22 elements, along with special syntax for creating them. With these classes we can represent any kind of *this and that* relationship between any number of terms.

The classes are called `Tuple1[A]` through to `Tuple22[A, B, C, ...]` but they can also be written in the sugared form `(A, B, C, ...)`. For example:

~~~ scala
scala> Tuple2("hi", 1) // unsugared syntax
res19: (String, Int) = (hi,1)

scala> ("hi", 1) // sugared syntax
res19: (String, Int) = (hi,1)

scala> ("hi", 1, true)
res20: (String, Int, Boolean) = (hi,1,true)
~~~

We can define methods that accept tuples as parameters using the same syntax:

~~~ scala
scala> def tuplized[A, B](in: (A, B)) = in._1
tuplized: [A, B](in: (A, B))A

scala> tuplized(("a", 1))
res21: String = a
~~~

We can also pattern match on tuples as follows:

~~~ scala
scala> (1, "a") match {
     |   case (a, b) => a + b
     | }
res3: String = 1a
~~~

Although pattern matching is the natural way to deconstruct a tuple, each class also has a compliment of fields named `_1`, `_2` and so on:

~~~ scala
scala> val x = (1, "b", true)
x: (Int, String, Boolean) = (1,b,true)

scala> x._1
res5: Int = 1

scala> x._3
res6: Boolean = true
~~~

## This or That

Now let's look at using generics to model a *this or that* relationship. Previously we did this using inheritance, factoring out the common aspects into a supertype. The functional equivalent of this is called a **sum type**.

Consider a method that, depending on the value of its parameters, returns one of two types:

~~~ scala
def intOrString(input: Boolean) =
  if(input == true) 123 else "abc"
~~~

We can't simply write this method as shown above because the compiler will infer the result type as `Any`. Instead we have to introduce a new type to explicitly represent the disjunction:

~~~ scala
def intOrString(input: Boolean): Sum[Int, String] =
  if(input == true) {
    Left[Int, String](123)
  } else {
    Right[Int, String]("abc")
  }
~~~

### Exercise: Generic Sum Type

Implement a trait `Sum[A, B]` with two subtypes `Left` and `Right`. Create type parameters so that `Left` and `Right` can wrap up values of two different types.

Hint: you will need to put both type parameters on all three types. Example usage:

~~~ scala
scala> Left[Int, String](1).value
res24: Int = 1

scala> Right[Int, String]("foo").value
res25: String = foo

scala> val sum: Sum[Int, String] = Right("foo")
sum: Sum[Int,String] = Right(foo)

scala> sum match {
     |   case Left(x) => x.toString
     |   case Right(x) => x
     | }
res26: String = foo
~~~

<div class="solution">
The code is very similar to `Box`, except that we need both type parameters:

~~~ scala
sealed trait Sum[A, B]
final case class Left[A, B](val value: A) extends Sum[A, B]
final case class Right[A, B](val value: B) extends Sum[A, B]
~~~

Scala has the generic sum type `Either` for two cases, but it does not have types for more cases.
</div>

## Generic Error Handling

In a previous exercise we "solved" the problem of dividing by zero by defining a type called `DivisionResult`. This forced us to handle the possibility of a division by zero in order to access the value.

With our knowledge of generics we can now generalise `DivisionResult` to encapsulate potential errors of any type. Modify `DivisionResult` to create a generic trait called `PossibleResult` with two subtypes, `ActualResult` and `NoResult`. Rewrite `divide` to return a `PossibleResult[Int]`. Example usage:

~~~ scala
divide(1, 0) match {
  case ActualResult[Int](value) => println(s"It's finite: ${value}")
  case NoResult[Int]()          => println(s"It's infinite")
}
~~~

<div class="solution">
Ideally we would like to write something like this:

~~~ scala
sealed trait PossibleResult[A]
final case class ActualResult[A](val value: A) extends PossibleResult[A]
final case object NoResult extends PossibleResult[???]
~~~

However, objects can't have type parameters. In order to make `NoResult` an object we need to provide a concrete type in the `extends PossibleResult` part of the definition. But what type should we use? In the absence of a preference for a particular data type, we could use something like `Unit` or `Nothing`. However this leads to type errors:

~~~ scala
scala> :paste
sealed trait PossibleResult[A]
final case class ActualResult[A](val value: A) extends PossibleResult[A]
final case object NoResult extends PossibleResult[Nothing]
^D

defined trait PossibleResult
defined class ActualResult
defined module NoResult

scala> val possible: PossibleResult[Int] = NoResult
<console>:9: error: type mismatch;
 found   : NoResult.type
 required: PossibleResult[Int]
       val possible: PossibleResult[Int] = NoResult
~~~

The problem here is that `NoResult` is a `PossibleResult[Nothing]` and a `PossibleResult[Nothing]` is not a `PossibleResult[Int]`.

We'll see how to overcome this limitation later. In the meantime we can define `NoResult` as a class with a type parameter as a stop-gap solution:

~~~ scala
sealed trait PossibleResult[A]
final case class ActualResult[A](val value: A) extends PossibleResult[A]
final case class NoResult[A]() extends PossibleResult[A]

object division {
  def apply(num: Int, den: Int) =
    if(den == 0) NoResult[Int] else ActualResult(num / den)
}
~~~

Regardless, `PossibleResult` is a powerful concept -- it allows us to represent objects that may or may not contain a value. We can see this as an alternative to using `null`, except that the compiler can verify that we never get a `NullPointerException`.

In fact, `PossibleResult` is such a useful concept that Scala defines a core class called `Option` for this very purpose. `Option` is a trait with two subtypes, `Some` for storing a value and `None` representing an empty value.
</div>

## Type Bounds

It is sometimes useful to constrain a generic type. We can do this with type bounds indicating that a generic type should be a sub- or super-type of some given types. The syntax is `A <: Type` to declare `A` must be a subtype of `Type` and `A >: Type` to declare a supertype.

For example, the following type allows us to store a `Visitor` or any subtype:

~~~ scala
case class WebAnalytics[A <: Visitor](
  visitor: A,
  pageViews: Int,
  searchTerms: List[String],
  isOrganic: Boolean
)
~~~

Commit message:

Fix typos, rename `PossibleResult` to `Maybe`

src/pages/objects/generics.md, after:

---
layout: page
title: "This contains That: Generics"
---

In the previous sections we saw how to model relationships such as **this and that** and **this or that** using *inheritance* -- a classic object oriented design pattern. In this section we will look at how to model these relationships in another way using **aggregation** -- grouping objects together using other objects.

We already know how to do simple aggregation in simple cases using fields. Here we start generalising over the types in our fields using **generic types**.

## Generic Types

Generic types naturally arise in collections, so let's consider a really simple collection -- a box that stores a single value. We don't care what type is stored in the box, but we want to make sure we preserve that type when we get the value out of the box. To do this we use a generic type.

~~~ scala
scala> case class Box[A](val value: A)
defined class Box

scala> Box(2)
res0: Box[Int] = Box(2)

scala> res0.value
res1: Int = 2

scala> Box("hi") // if we omit the type parameter, scala will infer its value
res2: Box[String] = Box(hi)

scala> res2.value
res3: String = hi
~~~

The syntax `[A]` is called a **type parameter** -- it binds a name to a type. Wherever `A` occurs in our class definition we will substitute in the same type. This works in the same way that binding a name to a value (using `val`) allows us to substitute in the value wherever the name occurs. The only difference is that we're operating on types rather than values.

We can also add type parameters to methods, which limits the scope of the parameter to the method declaration and body:

~~~ scala
scala> def generic[A](in: A): A = in
generic: [A](in: A)A

scala> generic[String]("foo")
res10: String = foo

scala> generic(1) // again, if we omit the type parameter, scala will infer it
res11: Int = 1
~~~

## This and That

Let's look at using generics to model a *this and that* relationship. Consider a method that returns two values -- for example, an `Int` and a `String`, or a `Boolean` and a `Double`:

~~~ scala
def intAndString: ??? = // ...

def booleanAndDouble: ??? = // ...
~~~

The question is what do we use as the return types? We could use a regular class without any type parameters, but then we would have to implement one version of the class for each combination of return types:

~~~ scala
case class IntAndString(intValue: Int, stringValue: String)

def intAndString: IntAndString = // ...

case class BooleanAndDouble(booleanValue: Boolean, doubleValue: Double)

def booleanAndDoule: BoleanAndDouble = // ...
~~~

The answer is to use generics to create something called a **product type** -- for example a `Pair` -- that contains the relevant data for *both* return types:

~~~ scala
def intAndString: Pair[Int, String] = // ...

def booleanAndDouble: Pair[Boolean, Double] = // ...
~~~

### Exercise: Pairs

Implement the `Pair` class from above. It should store two values -- `one` and `two` -- and be generic in both arguments. Example usage:

~~~ scala
scala> val pair = Pair[String, Int]("hi", 2)
pair: Pair[String,Int] = Pair(hi,2)

scala> pair.one
res13: String = hi

scala> pair.two
res14: Int = 2
~~~

<div class="solution">
If one type parameter is good, two type parameters are better:

~~~ scala
case class Pair[A, B](val one: A, val two: B)
~~~

Note that we don't always need to specify the type parameters when we construct `Pairs`. The compiler will attempt to infer the types as usual wherever it can:

~~~ scala
scala> val pair = Pair("hi", 2)
pair: Pair[String,Int] = Pair(hi,2)
~~~
</div>

### Tuples

A *tuple* is the generalisation of a pair to any number of terms. Scala includes built-in generic tuple types with up to 22 elements, along with special syntax for creating them. With these classes we can represent any kind of *this and that* relationship between any number of terms.

The classes are called `Tuple1[A]` through to `Tuple22[A, B, C, ...]` but they can also be written in the sugared form `(A, B, C, ...)`. For example:

~~~ scala
scala> Tuple2("hi", 1) // unsugared syntax
res19: (String, Int) = (hi,1)

scala> ("hi", 1) // sugared syntax
res19: (String, Int) = (hi,1)

scala> ("hi", 1, true)
res20: (String, Int, Boolean) = (hi,1,true)
~~~

We can define methods that accept tuples as parameters using the same syntax:

~~~ scala
scala> def tuplized[A, B](in: (A, B)) = in._1
tuplized: [A, B](in: (A, B))A

scala> tuplized(("a", 1))
res21: String = a
~~~

We can also pattern match on tuples as follows:

~~~ scala
scala> (1, "a") match {
     |   case (a, b) => a + b
     | }
res3: String = 1a
~~~

Although pattern matching is the natural way to deconstruct a tuple, each class also has a compliment of fields named `_1`, `_2` and so on:

~~~ scala
scala> val x = (1, "b", true)
x: (Int, String, Boolean) = (1,b,true)

scala> x._1
res5: Int = 1

scala> x._3
res6: Boolean = true
~~~

## This or That

Now let's look at using generics to model a *this or that* relationship. Previously we did this using inheritance, factoring out the common aspects into a supertype. The functional equivalent of this is called a **sum type**.

Consider a method that, depending on the value of its parameters, returns one of two types:

~~~ scala
def intOrString(input: Boolean) =
  if(input == true) 123 else "abc"
~~~

We can't simply write this method as shown above because the compiler will infer the result type as `Any`. Instead we have to introduce a new type to explicitly represent the disjunction:

~~~ scala
def intOrString(input: Boolean): Sum[Int, String] =
  if(input == true) {
    Left[Int, String](123)
  } else {
    Right[Int, String]("abc")
  }
~~~

### Exercise: Generic Sum Type

Implement a trait `Sum[A, B]` with two subtypes `Left` and `Right`. Create type parameters so that `Left` and `Right` can wrap up values of two different types.

Hint: you will need to put both type parameters on all three types. Example usage:

~~~ scala
scala> Left[Int, String](1).value
res24: Int = 1

scala> Right[Int, String]("foo").value
res25: String = foo

scala> val sum: Sum[Int, String] = Right("foo")
sum: Sum[Int,String] = Right(foo)

scala> sum match {
     |   case Left(x) => x.toString
     |   case Right(x) => x
     | }
res26: String = foo
~~~

<div class="solution">
The code is very similar to `Box`, except that we need both type parameters:

~~~ scala
sealed trait Sum[A, B]
final case class Left[A, B](val value: A) extends Sum[A, B]
final case class Right[A, B](val value: B) extends Sum[A, B]
~~~

Scala has the generic sum type `Either` for two cases, but it does not have types for more cases.
</div>

## Generic Error Handling

In a previous exercise we "solved" the problem of dividing by zero by defining a type called `DivisionResult`. This forced us to handle the possibility of a division by zero in order to access the value.

With our knowledge of generics we can now generalise `DivisionResult` to encapsulate potential errors of any type. Modify `DivisionResult` to create a generic trait called `Maybe` with two subtypes, `Full` and `Empty`. Rewrite `divide` to return a `Maybe[Int]`. Example usage:

~~~ scala
divide(1, 0) match {
  case Full[Int](value) => println(s"It's finite: ${value}")
  case Empty[Int]()     => println(s"It's infinite")
}
~~~

<div class="solution">
Ideally we would like to write something like this:

~~~ scala
sealed trait Maybe[A]
final case class Full[A](val value: A) extends Maybe[A]
final case object Empty extends Maybe[???]
~~~

However, objects can't have type parameters. In order to make `Empty` an object we need to provide a concrete type in the `extends Maybe` part of the definition. But what type parameter should we use? In the absence of a preference for a particular data type, we could use something like `Unit` or `Nothing`. However this leads to type errors:

~~~ scala
scala> :paste
sealed trait Maybe[A]
final case class Full[A](val value: A) extends Maybe[A]
final case object Empty extends Maybe[Nothing]
^D

defined trait Maybe
defined class Full
defined module Empty

scala> val possible: Maybe[Int] = Empty
<console>:9: error: type mismatch;
 found   : Empty.type
 required: Maybe[Int]
       val possible: Maybe[Int] = Empty
~~~

The problem here is that `Empty` is a `Maybe[Nothing]` and a `Maybe[Nothing]` is not a `Maybe[Int]`.

We'll see how to overcome this limitation later. In the meantime we can define `Empty` as a class with a type parameter as a stop-gap solution:

~~~ scala
sealed trait Maybe[A]
final case class Full[A](val value: A) extends Maybe[A]
final case class Empty[A]() extends Maybe[A]

object division {
  def apply(num: Int, den: Int) =
    if(den == 0) Empty[Int] else Full(num / den)
}
~~~

Regardless, `Maybe` is a powerful concept -- it allows us to represent objects that may or may not contain a value. We can see this as an alternative to using `null`, except that the compiler can verify that we never get a `NullPointerException`.

In fact, `Maybe` is so useful that Scala defines a core class called `Option` for this very purpose. `Option` is a trait with two subtypes, `Some` for storing a value and `None` representing an empty value.
</div>

## Type Bounds

It is sometimes useful to constrain a generic type. We can do this with type bounds indicating that a generic type should be a sub- or super-type of some given types. The syntax is `A <: Type` to declare `A` must be a subtype of `Type` and `A >: Type` to declare a supertype.

For example, the following type allows us to store a `Visitor` or any subtype:

~~~ scala
case class WebAnalytics[A <: Visitor](
  visitor: A,
  pageViews: Int,
  searchTerms: List[String],
  isOrganic: Boolean
)
~~~
